Prepare release notes (#83)
enarx/enarx.github.io: docs/Contributing/Release.md

# How to Release

## Prerequisites:
- Prepare release notes
- Update all `rust` channels (nightly, beta & stable)

## Update and release prerequiste crates

### Prerequisites
This includes `xsave`, `sallyport`, etc crates:
- Ensure all approved PRs are merged
- Get latest updates
  ```bash
  git fetch --all

>   git rebase upstream/main

Author: Addressed.

  ```
- Determine if crate builds and if it works
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo <+nightly | +beta> test
  ```
- Update dependencies
  ```bash

>   cargo update

Reviewer: What I suggested to Paul is to update dependencies *after* a release.
I think ideal solution would be:
- Produce a snapshot of `main` every Wednesday. That snapshot is tested, maybe deployed to a staging environment
- Open a dependency update PR every Thursday
- Tag the snapshot from last week on Monday after sufficient testing and assuring that everything works fine

  ```
- Determine version bump by reviewing output of `git log`
- Update and bump version in `Cargo.toml`
- Run `cargo test` again
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash
  git commit -asm 'Release vX.X.X'
  git push origin
  ```
- Confirm that changes passed on CI
- Create a git tag
  ```bash
  git tag vX.X.X

>   git push origin vX.X.X

Author: Addressed

  ```
- Cargo publish
  ```bash
  cargo +beta publish
  ```

### `enarx` Pre-release
- Ensure all PRs are merged and that all CI tests passes
- Check to see `Cargo.toml` is refering to the latest updated prerequisite crates
- Run cargo-update on all individual sub-crates in updated packages are referenced
   ```bash
   cd internal/
   for d in ./*/ ; do (cd "$d" && cargo update); done

>    cd ..

Author: Addressed

   ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash
   git commit -asm 'Updated Enarx sub-crate dependencies'
   ```
- Run cargo update on `enarx`
  ```bash
  cargo update
  ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash
   git commit -asm 'Updated Enarx dependencies'
   ```
- Run build and tests
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo +nightly build

>   cargo +nightly tests

Author: Addressed

  ```

## `enarx` Release
- Bump version inside sub-crate `internal/{shim-sev,shim-sgx,wasmdr}/Cargo.toml` files
  ```bash
   cd internal/
   for d in ./*/ ; do (cd "$d" && sed -i '' 's/^version = "<OLD_VERSION>"/version = "<NEW_VERSION>"/' Cargo.toml); done

>    ```

Author: Addressed

- Rename `Cargo.toml` TOML files to work around the fact that `cargo` does not allow publishing subcrates
  ```bash
   for i in internal/*/Cargo.toml; do git mv $i ${i%.toml}.tml; done
   ```
- Check cargo manifest with `cargo package --allow-dirty`
- Run unittests `cargo test`
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash
  git commit -asm 'Release vX.X.X'
  git push origin`
  ```
- Create and push `git` tag
  ```bash
  git tag v.X.X.X
  ```
- Create and push `git` tag
  ```bash
  git tag v.X.X.X
  git push origin HEAD
  git push --tags origin HEAD
  ```
- Package and publish Enarx crate
  ```bash
  cargo publish -v
  ```

> - Restore Cargo.tml files to Cargo.toml fils

Author: Addressed

# Release Process

## Prerequisites:
- Prepare release notes

## Weekly chores
### Enarx dependency update
- Update local code
  ```bash

>   git fetch --all
>   git checkout main
>   git pull --ff-only

Reviewer: Why not just 
```suggestion
  git fetch --all
  git checkout origin/main
```
?

This would work for any setup, assuming that enarx remote is named `origin`

  ```
- Checkout chore branch
  ```bash

>   git checkout -b update-prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  git checkout -b chore/cargo-update
```
?

  ```

> - Check to see `Cargo.toml` is refering to the latest updated prerequisite crates

Reviewer: At this point nothing was updated yet, why would that be the case? Or does this mean checking that there is no diff in the tree? I am not sure what this step is for
```suggestion
- Check that `Cargo.toml` refers to the latest versions of the updated prerequisite crates
```

Author: Removed this.

> - Run cargo-update on all individual sub-crates in updated packages are referenced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run `cargo update` within all individual sub-crates
```

   ```bash
   for d in internal/*/ ; do (cd "$d" && cargo update); done
   ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash

>    git commit -asm 'Updated Enarx sub-crate dependencies'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   git commit -asm 'chore(deps): update internal crate dependencies'
```

   ```
- Run cargo update on `enarx`
  ```bash
  cargo update
  ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash

>    git commit -asm 'Updated Enarx dependencies'

Reviewer: idem, this should follow the commit guidelines we agreed upon and subject should be in imperative tense

   ```
- Run build and tests
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo build
  cargo tests
  ```
- Create PR
  ```bash

>   git push origin update-prerequisites

Reviewer: This will only work if you have access to upstream repo, normally PRs are expected to be submitted from a fork. Normally creating PR branches in the same repo is discouraged, because that way we will likely accumulate a lot of old, unused branches over time.

Author: Originally I was using `upstream` referring to github.com/enarx/enarx.git and `origin` referring to my fork, but per @haraldh's previous comment I tried to simplify this to use a single remote. For updating the prerequisites, I think it might be good to reuse a single `chore/cargo-update` remote branch. Thoughts?

  ```

## Enarx Release

### Update and release prerequiste crates (this may be an optional step)
This includes `xsave`, `sallyport`, etc crates:
- Ensure all approved PRs are merged
- Get latest updates and checkout branch
  ```bash
  git fetch --all
  git checkout main

>   git pull --ff-only

Reviewer: Again, I think we should just check out the head directly

  git checkout -b update/deps
  ```
- Update dependencies
  ```bash
  cargo update
  ```
- Determine if crate builds and if it works
  ```bash
  cargo clean

>   cargo test

Reviewer: Why is `cargo build` present in `enarx` main repo and not here?

  ```

> - Determine version bump by reviewing output of `git log`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Determine expected version by reviewing output of `git log`
```
Maybe?

> - Update and bump version in `Cargo.toml`

Reviewer: Define "bump"

- Run `cargo test` again
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash

>   git commit -asS -m 'Release vX.X.X'

Reviewer: Maybe we should also have a convention here? E.g.
```suggestion
  git commit -asS -m 'release: vX.X.X'
```

Author: I've been following @npmccallum's convention here.

  git push origin
  ```
- Confirm that changes passed on CI
- Create a git tag
  ```bash

>   git tag vX.X.X

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  git tag --sign vX.X.X
```

Author: Fixed.

>   git push --tags origin vX.X.X

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  git push origin vX.X.X
```

  ```
- Cargo publish
  ```bash
  cargo publish
  ```

### The Enarx release itself
- Get latest updates and checkout branch
  ```bash
  git fetch --all
  git checkout main

>   git pull --ff-only

Reviewer: Again, no need to depend or modify a local branch

  git checkout -b release-<my fancy new version>
  ```
- Bump version inside sub-crate `internal/{shim-sev,shim-sgx,wasmdr}/Cargo.toml` files
  ```bash
  export OLD_VERSION=$(grep '^version =' Cargo.toml | cut -d'=' -f 2)
  export NEW_VERSION='"<my fancy new version>"'
  for d in internal/*/ ; do (cd "$d" \

>     sed -i \""s/^version = ${OLD_VERSION}/version = ${NEW_VERSION}/"\" Cargo.toml \

Reviewer: `OLD_VERSION` is not necessary, this could be just `.*`

    cargo update -p $(basename ${d}) \

>     git mv $i ${i%.toml}.tml ) \

Reviewer: What is `$i`? Where is it defined?

Author: Fixed.

  done
  ```

> - Run unittests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run unit tests
```

  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo test
  ```
- Check cargo manifest
  ```bash
  cargo package --allow-dirty -l
  ```
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash

>   git commit -asS -m "Release v${NEW_VERSION}"

Reviewer: see above

Author: Updated commit string to comply with conventional commits.

  ```
- Run `cargo update` within all individual sub-crates
   ```bash
   for d in internal/*/ ; do (cd "$d" && cargo update); done
   ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash
   git commit -asS -m 'chore(deps): update internal crate dependencies'
   ```
- Run cargo update on `enarx`
  ```bash
  cargo update
  ```
- Git commit sub-crate update
  ```bash
   git commit -asS -m 'chore(deps): update Enarx dependencies'
   ```
- Run build and tests
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo build
  cargo tests
  ```
- Create PR
  ```bash
  git push origin chore/cargo-update
  gh pr create --title "chore(deps): update Enarx dependencies"
  ```

## Enarx Release

### Update and release prerequiste crates
> **NOTE: ** This may be an optional step dependant on whether there are relevant changes in the prerequisite crates (e.g. `xsave`, `sallyport`, etc.):
- Determine expected version by reviewing output of `git log`
- Set new version
  ```bash
  export MAJOR=0
  export MINOR=2
  export PATCH=2
  export NEW_VERSION="${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.${PATCH}"
  ```
- Ensure all approved PRs are merged
- Get latest updates and checkout branch
  ```bash
  git fetch --all
  git checkout origin/main

>   git checkout -b b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git checkout -b "b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z"
```

  ```
- Update dependencies
  ```bash
  cargo update
  ```
- Determine if crate builds and if it works
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo build
  cargo test
  ```
- Update version in `Cargo.toml`
  ```bash
  sed -i 's/^version = .*/version = \"'${NEW_VERSION}'\"/' Cargo.toml
  cargo update -p $(grep name Cargo.toml | cut -d'"' -f2)
  ```
- Run `cargo test` again
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo build
  cargo test
  ```
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash
  git commit -asS -m "chore(release): Release v${NEW_VERSION}"
  git push origin
  ```
- Confirm that changes passed on CI
- Create a git tag
  ```bash
  git tag --sign -m "chore(release): Release v${NEW_VERSION}" v${NEW_VERSION}

>   git push --tags origin b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git push --tags origin "b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z"
```

  ```
- Cargo publish
  ```bash
  cargo publish
  ```
- Create a PR
  ```bash
  gh pr create --title "Release v${NEW_VERSION}"
  ```

### The Enarx release itself
- Determine expected version by reviewing output of `git log`
- Set new version
  ```bash
  export MAJOR=0
  export MINOR=2
  export PATCH=2
  export NEW_VERSION="${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.${PATCH}"
  ```
- Get latest updates and checkout branch
  ```bash
  git fetch --all
  git checkout origin/main

>   git checkout -b b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git checkout -b "b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z"
```

  ```
- Bump version inside sub-crate `internal/{shim-sev,shim-sgx,wasmdr}/Cargo.toml` files
  ```bash
  for d in internal/*/ ; do ( cd "$d"
    sed -i 's/^version = .*/version = \"'${NEW_VERSION}'\"/' Cargo.toml
    cargo update -p $(basename ${d})
    git mv Cargo.toml Cargo.tml )
  done
  sed -i 's/^version = .*/version = \"'${NEW_VERSION}'\"/' Cargo.toml

>   cargo update -p enarx

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  cargo update -p $(grep name Cargo.toml | cut -d'"' -f2)
```

  ```
- _POTENTIALLY OPTIONAL STEP: If there are any changes in the prerequisite crates (e.g. `xsave`, `sallyport`, etc) then it will be required to manually update the crates now_
  ```bash
  export UPDATED_PREREQUISTES=(xsave sallyport)
  for d in internal/*/ ; do ( cd "$d"
    for p in ${UPDATED_PREREQUISTES[@]]}; do

>       cargo update -p ${p}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      cargo update -p "${p}"
```

    done
  done
  for p in ${UPDATED_PREREQUISTES[@]]}; do cargo update -p ${p}; done
  ```
- Run unit tests
  ```bash
  cargo clean
  cargo build
  cargo test
  ```
- Rename Cargo.toml to Cargo.tml in sub-crates to address `cargo` sub-crate limitation
  ```bash
  for d in internal/*/ ; do ( cd "$d"
    git mv Cargo.toml Cargo.tml )
  done
- Check cargo manifest
  ```bash
  cargo package --allow-dirty -l
  ```
- Commit change and push to repo
  ```bash
  git commit -asS -m "chore(release): Release v${NEW_VERSION}"

>   git push origin release/${NEW_VERSION}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git push origin "release/${NEW_VERSION}"
```

  ```
- Create and push `git` tag
  ```bash
  git tag --sign -m "chore(release): Release v${NEW_VERSION}" v${NEW_VERSION}

>   git push --tags origin b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git push --tags origin "b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z"
```

  ```
- Package and publish Enarx crate
  ```bash
  cargo publish -v
  ```
- Restore Cargo.tml files to Cargo.toml files
  ```bash
  for i in internal/*/Cargo.tml; do git mv $i ${i%.tml}.toml; done
  git commit -asS -m 'chore(release): put back Cargo.toml files'

>   git push origin b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  git push origin "b${MAJOR}.${MINOR}.z"
```

  ```
- Create a PR
  ```bash
  gh pr create --title "Release v${NEW_VERSION}"
- Create draft GitHub release
  ```bash

>   gh release create -d --generate-notes v${NEW_VERSION}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  gh release create -d --generate-notes "v${NEW_VERSION}"
```

# Release Process

## Versioning
- Major stable public release versions require a major number increase

> - Breaking changes and major features require a minor number increase

Reviewer 2: Hmm... not accurate .. but well

- Bugfixes require a patch number increase

## Remotes
> **NOTE:** Regarding git remotes:
> * `upstream` points to core repository location

> > * `origin` points to the user's fork

Reviewer 2: Ah, well, I personally have `origin` as the original and my own or other forks as `$USERNAME` (`haraldh`).

Author: <aybe I should set this behind a variable then. It's more of an assumption for the sake of documentation purposes.

# Release Process

## Prerequisites:
- Prepare release notes
- `cargo` credentials are cached
- `git` credentials are available on host to allow pushing code
- `gh` installed and configured

## Weekly chores
* [Update Rust toolchain](https://github.com/enarx/enarx/actions/workflows/rust-toolchain-update.yml)
* [Update Cargo dependencies](https://github.com/enarx/enarx/actions/workflows/cargo-update.yml)
  

## Enarx Release
> **NOTE:** Regarding git remotes:
> * `upstream` points to core repository location
> * `origin` points to the user's fork

### Update and release prerequiste crates
> **NOTE:** The list of crates that need to be updated for a release can be seen by running this following command: 
> ```bash
> grep -R 'git+https' *.lock | sort | uniq
> ```
> This may be an optional step dependant on whether there are relevant changes in the prerequisite crates, including:
> * crt0stack
> * flagset
> * iocuddle
> * lset
> * mmarinus
> * mmledger
> * nbytes
> * noted
> * primordial
> * rcrt1
> * sallyport
> * sgx
> * snp
> * vsdo

> > * xsave

Author: Done
